I’m Will, and like most people I wear a lot of hats. One thing that I try to keep constant though is that I’m passionate about driving effective change, and enabling others to realise their potential.

For over a decade I’ve worked in technology and tech transformation across a range of sectors, including charity foundations and social enterprises, healthcare, and in education. In addition, as co-founder of a web-agency, I’ve helped dozens of social organisations get the most out of their online presence. I’m current the Technology Lead for [Esmee Fairbairn Foundation](https://esmeefairbairn.org.uk), and a trustee of [the School for Social Entrepreneurs](https://the-sse.org). 

With this site I want to share what I’ve learned - and what I’m still learning - about technology, the internet, and the huge role it plays in our lives. If you are a small to mid-sized charity, social enterprise, or socially-minded organisation, wanting to understand more about technology, I write this site for you. I hope that to help you squeeze the most out of your budgets, understand the decisions that you have to make when it comes to tech, and raise the level of understanding in your organisation, all without worrying about the implications on the work you do.

To learn more about me and my background, read my [about page]({{site.url}}/about). If you think there’s something missing from the site - [let me know]({{site.url}}/contact)! And if you think there is anything I might be able to help your organisation with, [drop me an email](mailto:will@willchurchill.co.uk) and we can arrange a no-obligation chat.

Otherwise, have a poke around, and I hope you find something useful.