---
layout: 5in5
image: https://willchurchill.co.uk/assets/images/posts/5-in-5.png

title: 27th August 2021
date: 2021-08-27T10:0:0+00:00
description: "It's questions this time round from me: questions I had whilst developing a Chrome extension, questions I have on the use of social media, "
categories: ['5in5','politics','technology','mental health']
tags: ['politics','technology','mental health','social media']
---

## <i class="fas fa-comment"></i> General Thoughts
I had a conversation with a friend the other day about social media. One of the things I struggle with is the fact that I have a platform (such as it is) but rarely make use of it for anything beyond sarcastic comments and the occasional chat about TV or Film. I go back and forth on whether this is "ok". Should I be doing more to speak out about certain things? Maybe. But also, does the world really need my uneducated thoughts on Afghanistan? Probably not.

It's prompted me to think a bit more about what I comment on. I'll weigh in with thoughts about Matt Hancock because I have an education in Politics and a stake in mental health support, or I'll comment about a Rockefeller Foundation report on technology because I work in tech in the social sector. Those things are "safe" for me to talk about, because I believe I have credibility in those areas.

But that's a dangerous slope to be on, surely? Firstly it means I'm rarely stepping out of my comfort zone in public. I've been called out recently for being a bad ally to a particular group, and it's hard to argue against that. Failing to comment on something just because it's out of my wheelhouse leaves a very limited number of things I'll provide public support on.

The other reason it makes me uneasy though, is that it's a very short logical leap from "I don't want to opine on that because I don't have all the information." to "You over there - why are you chatting about things you don't understand?" I've been on the other end of the second one, while trying to articulate my thoughts and pick my way through learning. I'm sure I've done it myself, but I don't want to be the kind of person that shuts someone else down for trying to understand.

So I guess the question I'm pondering is, how do I go about expressing learnings?

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Interesting reading from <a href="https://twitter.com/RockefellerFdn?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@RockefellerFdn</a> on how different communities used technology to respond to vaccine rollouts.<a href="https://t.co/f8ZESPIds8">https://t.co/f8ZESPIds8</a></p>&mdash; Will Churchill (@willchurchill) <a href="https://twitter.com/willchurchill/status/1410523866439507975?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 1, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

## <i class="fas fa-microchip"></i> Technology
I had an interesting experience this month developing a [new Chrome extension](https://willchurchill.co.uk/musings/my-new-todo-lists/). The extension itself does nothing more than store 10 items, so that when you open a new tab they are there for you to tick off. The whole thing took maybe an afternoon to code, but I spent the better part of two weeks going back and forth with the Google Dev team to get it put onto the Chrome Web Store.

Initially, the problem was a lack of Privacy Policy, which was confusing for software that didn't store any data. Then there was an issue with the fact that I had stated the intention of the app was as a to-do list, but it comes up when the user opens a new tab. Because it overrides the standard function of Chrome, and this didn't seem relevant to a to-do app, it was rejected.

I understand why, and these days more than ever we've got to be careful about the software we install on our devices. But it's got me thinking about barriers to learning for something like web development. Was the work I had to do to get it on the store useful learning, or was it a hindrance that someone less stubborn than myself would have taken to mean they weren't "good enough" to be a coder?

## <i class="fas fa-heart"></i> Mental Health


## <i class="fas fa-hands-helping"></i> Social Sector


