---
parent-collection: 29-october-2020
title: Politics
order: 1
length: half
icon: vote-yea
---

So we're rapidly approaching the cliff-edge that is Brexit. Weirdly the thing that made the news this week was [soy-sauce](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2020/oct/28/dfids-brexit-soy-sauce-price-cut-claim-prompts-backlash-bake-off). It's strange what we'll latch on to, given the overwhelming lack of clarity in other places.

Against the backdrop of an uncertain relationship with the United States after their election, the House of Lords are set to throw out much Boris Johnson's bill when it is put in front of them in a couple of weeks.

I mused to a couple of people last week that Johnson's actions of late don't strike me as someone who thinks they'll run for Prime Minister at the next election. We're still a fair way off of course, but between his handling of Brexit and COVID he's not making any friends politically or publicly. I wonder whether his actions are more in line with someone trying to go down in history. We'll come out of both calamities sooner or later, and when we do he will have been at the helm. Regardless of what position we're in, that does give him some license to dictate the narrative. If his aim was to seek re-election, he'd have done well to make more friends along the way. If on the other hand his aim is to succeed against great odds, and be the consistent voice in the sea of people telling him he's doing the wrong thing, well maybe he's playing his part well.