---
title: How can Aristotle defend ‘polity’ as a combination of two corrupt forms of regime?
date: 2009-11-30T12:00:00+00:00
module: Politics
wordcount: 2023
---

Aristotle defines ‘polity’ (or, as it is sometimes referred to, ‘constitutional government’) as a mixture of two types of constitution: democracy and oligarchy. Being a mixture, it is possible to have different forms of ‘polity’ – ranging from the more democratic (i.e. the weighting of the mixture is towards those parts of the constitution that favour the poor) to the more aristocratic (i.e. the mixture favours the people who are ‘better suited’ to the task of ruling – hence why those constitutions that tend “more to oligarchy are called aristocracies”). (Politics, 1293b)

‘Democracy’ in some contexts is understood to mean ‘rule of the many’. This is however (certainly in the context described by Aristotle) incorrect. It should in fact refer to the ‘rule of the poor’. It just so happens, as Aristotle points out, that the poor tend to number greater than the rich (hence the confusion between the two definitions).
‘Oligarchy’ by contrast refers to the ‘rule of the rich’ (not, as some would say, ‘rule of the few’). By definition, in order to become part of the ruling class of the oligarchy, one must show that he is sufficiently wealthy. This could be done in a number of ways, perhaps the most common of which was by using the size of ones land as a determinate. Again, as with the definition of democracy, Aristotle points out that it is a matter of coincidence that the rich tend to be fewer in number than the poor. If there were a situation where the rich outnumbered the poor, but the poor had sovereignty, it would still be a democracy. “It is inevitable that there should be an oligarchy where the rulers, whether they are few or many, owe their position to riches; and it is equally inevitable that there should be democracy where the poor rule.” (Politics, 1279b)

Aristotle believed that power should not be given unless it was to the best person(s) for the job, regardless of wealth or birth (he goes further than this, saying “The man who deserves the office should have it whether he wants it or not.” (Politics, 1271a)). In his writings, he uses the idea of a person who is a better flute player than anyone else, but who is “far inferior in birth and beauty”. Although some may argue that “birth and beauty are greater goods” (perhaps meaning that they are more desirable traits to the average person) they are irrelevant to playing the flute, and thus the better tools – in this case the flute itself – should be given to the person that may use them to the best advantage. As Aristotle puts it, “Superiority… ought to contribute something to the performance of that function.” (Politics, 1282b)
What Aristotle means by this, and to put this into a political context, is that it should be the people who will best serve the city and its interests (and, by definition, its people) that should have sovereignty. 

Aristotle goes on to describe how he would actually determine who is best suited for the job. The city, as he depicts it, should exist for the moral advancement of its citizens, to give them virtue, and to exist for the sake of the good life. As Coleman writes, “no one is born morally virtuous” however it is not against human nature to become so. (2000, p.187) Thus the purpose of the city is to develop this virtue. 
The Greeks used the concept of Eudaimonia. Loosely translated, this has been taken to mean happiness, though a more accurate definition would be “the ultimate goal and best life for human beings”. (Burns 2003, p.76)
In order for the city to be able to aspire to these goals, it must be under the right kind of leadership. To put it differently, those that have sovereignty must posses ‘good’ qualities (here, ‘good’ is used in the same way as in Eudaimonia).

With this in mind, Aristotle approaches the idea of who should be entrusted with this political power. As mentioned above, he believed that it should be in the hands of those who were best suited for the job, irrelevant of what ever else they may be. However he recognises that the sovereign can also perform injustices (as apposed to the idea that whatever the sovereign does is just and fair, because they are the one(s) in power). He argues this point against both the idea of oligarchical rule and democratic rule. Whoever is in power, he states, will try to take property from those not in power (i.e. the poor would take from the rich in a democracy, and the rich would exploit the poor in an oligarchy) because they are “…subject to the passions that beset their souls.” (Politics, 1281a)

These arguments are against the idea of ruling by the people. However, Aristotle does acknowledge that this form of rule (whether it be democratic, oligarchical, or otherwise) does have its benefits – particularly over sovereignty by law (which must in any case bear the marks of either oligarchy or democracy, and thus faces the same pitfalls). (Politics, 1281a) 
The rule of the many also has advantages over the rule of one (for example a monarchy). Aristotle writes that, while an individual may not be of the best quality, a collective, just as they have “many feet, many hands, and many senses, may also have many qualities of character and intelligence.” (Politics, 1281a) In other words, he is saying that a large group of people are still able to be good judges on matters (“or at any rate no worse” than those with expertise). He uses the examples of a householder being a better judge of the quality of a house than the builder, and a diner being a better judge of a feast than a cook, to show that it is not necessarily the creators of things that can best see their appropriateness. (Politics, 1232a) (Furthermore, if we are to use the argument of property as a means of judging suitability – as per an oligarchy – then as a collective, the people are likely to have a greater share of land between them than a single individual of high office. (Politics, 1282a))

Thus Aristotle surmises that a large group would perhaps be better suited to political power than a smaller one (though it is worth noting that he does recognise that this is not true in all cases). Another of the reasons for this is that a larger group of people are naturally more difficult to corrupt that a single individual, thereby implying that a large group of people will be more trustworthy and will pose a lower risk to the integrity of the sovereignty than one man (or, indeed a smaller group). To use more of Aristotle’s imagery: “In the same way that a larger volume of water [is not so liable to pollution], the people is not so liable to corruption as the few.” (Politics, 1286a)

But if all this is so obvious and true, then why have polities not existed throughout history? Or, perhaps a better question, why have monarchs (or other such instances where one individual holds power) existed at all? Aristotle believed that the answer to this was that, with small city sizes, it was hard to find a group of people who where “of outstanding goodness”, and much easier to find one man who was good. He goes on to say that democracies started to become more common as city sizes increased. This, he says, makes it “difficult for any form of constitution apart from democracy to exist.” (Politics, 1286b)

One major difference with the larger cities is the emergence of a more influential ‘middle class’. Aristotle believed that it was this middle class that held the key to a good government. He thought that the upper classes were too arrogant (and therefore did not attend to reason), and that the lower classes were more inclined to take to criminality. For those who rule to have either of these characteristics would be “dangerous to cities.” (Politics, 1295a)
If the middle class was strong enough – preferably stronger that both the upper and the middle classes combined, but at least stronger than the two individually – then it would “…prevent either of the opposing extremes from becoming dominant.” (Politics, 1295b) There would be no situation in which the upper and lower classes united to overthrow the middle, because the lower class resents the upper class for its riches, and similarly the upper class does not trust the lower class. Further to this, such a constitution (one decided by the middle class) would share principles of a democracy (rule of the poor) and of an aristocracy (rule of the best; rule of those most suited). The balance of the two sides depends on which parts of each type of constitution are adopted.
For an example of this, Aristotle looks to how magistrates are appointed. He talks about how the use of lot is democratic, while oligarchies use a vote system. Also, in a democracy one does not have to pass a property qualification to be eligible to be chosen, whereas in an oligarchy there is such a requirement. Thus in a polity, a system may be adopted (for example) whereby office holders are chosen by means of a vote (as in an oligarchy), but that there is no property qualification (as in a democracy) and so any citizen may be selected. (Politics, 1294a) Another example of a system of polity may see a property qualification, but one set low enough that most of the ‘poor’ still qualify. (Bentley 2009)

Simply having a large middle class does not define a polity however. Aristotle describes how a constitutional government can be formed of various combinations of ideas from democracy and oligarchy. A constitution may be considered a polity when it can be described as both democratic, and as oligarchical. Crucially, it must also be able to be thought of as being neither of these. In the words of Aristotle, a polity should “…owe its stability to its own intrinsic strength” and this strength should come from the fact that “…no section at all in the city would favour a change to a different constitution.” (Politics, 1294b)

Aristotle discusses throughout Politics (notably in Books III and IV) whether constitutions should be formed by one or by many (and indeed whether the laws should be upheld by one or by many). Though his argument swings from one side to the other, he frequently comes back to the idea that sovereign power should be in the hands of the many, and of the middle class. He says at one point “…the best way of life is one which consists in a mean, and a mean of the kind attainable by each individual.” (Politics, 1295a)

It would seem that, ultimately, some form of polity is the best way in which to run a government. Aristotle argues that even though both democracies and oligarchies have their drawbacks, constitutional governments are the most practical form of political power. Because “…law can only lay down general rules” (Politics, 1286a) and thus cannot deal with all eventualities in political matters, it is impossible to let the law be sovereign. However it is also true that it is highly unlikely, even impossible, that many cities will be able to achieve the best constitution. Therefore those who decide upon the constitution should “…have their eyes open not only to what is absolute best, but also to what is the best in relation to actual conditions.” (Politics, 1288b) In this way, Aristotle can justify polity as the best way to run a city. While it may have its flaws (among which the fact that it is made from two already corrupt forms of government – Aristotle believed that in these cases power was arbitrarily given with no real regard to merit (Burns 2003, p.82)) and is not therefore the ‘absolute best’ that is theoretically possible, it is never-the-less in some cases the only sensible option – it is the best in relation to actual conditions.
 
## BIBLIOGRAPHY

BENTLEY, R. (2009) Lecture Notes, POLI 1001

BURNS, T. (2003) Chapter 5: Aristotle IN: BOUCHER, D. ed. and KELLY, P. ed. (2003) Political Thinkers – From Socrates to the Present Oxford: University Press, 73-91.

COLEMAN, J. (2000) Political Thought – From Ancient Greece to Early Christianity, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

STALLEY, R. F. ed. (1995) Aristotle: Politics, Oxford: University Press.


