---
title: How does the mass media shape public understanding of environmental issues?
date: 2010-03-08T12:00:00+00:00
module: Politics
wordcount: 1545
---

The term ‘environmental issues’ is generally used to describe the effects (usually adverse) that human beings have on the natural surroundings. When being referred to in the media, these normally take two forms: ‘global warming’, and ‘climate change’. While they can be thought to be very similar, these two terms actually describe slightly different effects. ‘Global warming’ describes the increasing of the earth’s temperature on a worldwide scale, usually referring to the impact of industry. This term, whilst popular several years ago, has now largely been superseded by ‘climate change’. The latter seems to be favoured because it acknowledges that our actions towards the environment do not necessarily uniformly cause a rise in temperature. In some instances, temperatures fluctuate or even fall, thus rendering the global warming moniker inaccurate. ‘Climate change’, it is thought, better encompasses all aspects of the anthropogenic actions on the planet. (Dispensa and Brulle 2003, p74)

When using the term ‘mass media’, we refer to those media outlets that exist to serve the majority of the nation and provide information. Boycoff describes the mass media as “publishers, editors, journalists, and others who produce, interpret, and disseminate information, largely through newspapers, magazines, television, radio, and the Internet.” (2009, p 432)

The mass media, by its very nature, is everywhere. Alberto Melucci recognised this, and coined the term ‘information society’ to refer to the fact that no matter where we go we are constantly being bombarded by information. To emphasise its prevelance, Melucci stated that over 50% of people in advanced democracies are involved in the production, the processing, or the distribution of information (Saunders 2010). This can be seen simply by the ease with which information is available to us. In particular, the advent of the internet (and perhaps more particularly that of broadband), and the increased use of mobile technology, makes accessing a whole multitude of information very easy. Boycoff calls this a rise in “new media” and argue that it forms a “fundamental shift” in the way information is obtained. (2009, p434)

Melucci stressed that these information systems are controlled by big branded corporations, meaning that most of the information we see is in some way ‘sponsored’.
This is an interesting point, particularly when confronting an issue such as climate change. On the one side, it is the job of the media to inform the public of current events. But, as Melucci and others have pointed out, the media receives a vast majority of its revenue – sometimes up to 75% (Edwards and Cromwell 2006, p166) – from advertising large companies. This being the case, it is foolish to imagine that any media outlet wishing to retain their advertising revenue would publish a news article that blamed one of their sponsor’s products for (to give an example) the melting of the polar icecaps. Indeed, there have been a number of cases where newspapers have reported on, for example, the adverse effects of driving on the climate, only for them to lose money as the large car manufacturers respond by pulling their advertisements from their publications. 

However Paul Brown, environmental correspondent for the Guardian, disagrees with the view that newspapers need to tread carefully, saying in response to authors Edwards and Cromwell: “I do not think it generally makes the slightest difference to whether people advertise with us whether we attack them or not…” Edwards and Cromwell reject this as “not a remotely credible view” however, and go on to suggest that if its journalists “subjected the… advertisers to the kind of criticism they deserve, the Guardian would cease to exist as a commercial entity” (2006, p166).

This is such an important point because, as Melucci stated, media is everywhere. We get most of our information from a select number of sources, namely (in order of importance): Television, the internet, newspapers, radio, and magazines (Boycoff 2009, p434). Habermas said that society is characterised by “the manipulative deployment of media power to procure mass loyalty, consumer demand and compliance with systemic imperatives” (Saunders, 2010). So the media will play a very large role in our understanding of many things – the environment included. If it is true that the way this information is presented to us is being censored or manipulated in some way, can we really say that we are being given the full picture on climate change?

Does this matter? If all that a company needs to do in order for us to take notice is to put an advertisement in a national newspaper, then surely all the environmentally aware companies could simply go to the media and place adverts of their own? This way, we would be exposed to both sides of the argument, and are then free to make up our own minds.
The problem is that advertising costs money. The larger companies will have more money, and thus can pay for advertisements in places that smaller companies cannot. This financial power play introduces a bias within the media, meaning that some of the big multinational companies – like the oil and automotive industries – are able to buy their way onto the pages of our daily papers and the breaks between our TV soaps, leaving out the often smaller and less wealthy ‘eco-companies’. As a result of this, the public’s perception of issues could well be distorted.

And yet, seemingly regardless of the risks to the companies’ advertisement revenue (if the above arguments are considered), the media does report on issues of climate change. Usually however, this is done in a particular way. The emphasis of the reports are often placed more on the humanitarian side, rather than the scientific side. There are several explanations for this. Harbison et al. suggested that a lack of specialised journalistic training has lead to a decline in the number of climate change reports (Boycoff 2009, p445). It could also, by a similar argument, mean that those stories that were being reported on have less of a scientific focus. 
Another possible reason is simply that this sells more newspapers. Down’s developed the idea of the ‘Issue Attention Cycle’, and discovered that people will pay more attention to something that they can relate to. One of the reasons that news stories die out, Downs argues, is that people “do not suffer directly enough from [the subject matter] to keep their attention riveted on them.” Therefore if people are not grabbed by the story, for example if they are science-orientated to the point where people lose interest while trying to decipher the subject matter, then it will have a shorter run. As Downs notes, “…nearly all the media are run for profit, and they make the most money by appealing to the largest possible audiences.” (1972, p41-2)

But even when the media does report on climate change, the very nature of journalism favours a convention of balance within articles. This does not always happen, as some journalists have been known to only report on one side of an issue in exchange for an exclusive (and therefore profitable) story (Dispensa and Brulle 2003, p83). Even when two sides of the story are presented, the preferred 50/50 split between opinions can lead to a misguided picture of climate change being given to the public. Consensus within the scientific community is generally quoted as being around 80% in favour of the theory that climate change is a man-made, or at least man-influenced, phenomenon. However because the media gives equal attention to both the anthropogenic theorists, and those who believe climate change is natural (or indeed non-existent), public opinion has been affected. A study by Nisbet and Myers collated data from 20 years of surveys and found that, in a poll conducted by ABC in September 2005, when asked whether global warming was actually happening, only 56% of respondents were ‘Mostly convinced’, or ‘Completely convinced’. Furthermore, polls by OSU and ABC News found that, in 2007, only 40% believed that “most scientists agree with one another about whether global warming is happening.” (Nisbet and Myers 2007, p451-2)

The evidence shows that the media plays a very important part in shaping how the public understands environmental issues. In the case of climate change, various media biases have left a considerable proportion of the population with a misguided view on a number of aspects, including even (arguably) the most basic assumption: that the scientific community actually agrees with the idea of global warming as an anthropogenic matter.
Furthermore, the media itself has been shown to be influenced by its sources of revenue. The automotive, oil, and aviation industries, to name a few, all have stakes in various media corporations through their advertising. Various studies have shown that this, coupled with a lack of specialised journalistic training, has an impact on both the number of climate change articles, and the way in which those articles are presented.

The media is the primary source of information for the public, and with the age of ‘new media’, access to information has become far easier. However while the media presents a fair representation in some cases, for certain issues – such as climate change – there appears to be a number of factors that contribute to a less than accurate image. For this reason, it appears that the media has a detrimental effect on the publics understanding of environmental issues.

## Bibliography

CARPENTER, C. (2001) Businesses, green groups and the media: the role of non-governmental organizations in the climate change debate. International Affairs, 77 (2), 313-328. 

DISPENSA, J. M. and BRULLE, R. J. (2003) Media’s Social Construction of Environmental Issues: Focus on Global Warming – A Comparative Study. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 23 (10), 74-105.

DOWNS, A. (1972) Up and Down with Ecology – the “Issue-Attention Cycle”. The Public Interest, 28, 38-50.

EDWARDS, D. and CROMWELL, D. (2006) Guardians of Power: The myth of the liberal media, London: Pluto Press.

LAKE, L. M. (1983) The Environmental Mandate: Activists and the Electorate. Political Science Quarterly, 98 (2), 215-233.

NISBET, M. C. and MYERS, T. (2007) The Polls – Trends: Twenty years of Public Opinion about Global Warming. Public Opinion Quarterly, 71 (3), 444-470.

SAUNDERS, C. (2010) Lecture Notes, POLI 1003