---
title: What is the most persuasive critique of pluralism?
date: 2010-11-23T12:00:00+00:00
module: Politics
wordcount: 2184
---

Pluralism is a theory of governance championed perhaps most famously by Robert Dahl in the 1950s-1970s. Pluralists believe that there should not be any kind of monopoly of political power, but rather that power should have “many centres” (D+D p35). This idea of ‘anti-monism’ is not a recent one. As early as 4 BC, Aristotle argued against the running of the state by one individual, citing as a warning (amongst other reasons) the ease at which such a state could fall into corruption (Politics, 1286a). While Aristotle would perhaps not be best described as a pluralist, this argument would be recognised by those who would. There are, however, other arguments that Pluralists put forward in support of their theory. Specifically, they argue for “limited, constitutional government”, advocating individual rights (including freedom of speech, and freedom to property rights), a balanced institution (i.e. the separation of: powers of legislature, executive powers, and a judicial system), and a decentralised (or federal) government. (D+D p36).

In practice this means that, rather than the government having complete control over all aspects of the state, individuals “[combine] their efforts in groups in the competition for power” (Held p159). These groups – known as factions, or more recently interest groups – are each arguing for a given proposal or idea, and achieve their ends by putting pressure on the relevant parts of government. While there are inequalities within society, pluralists argue that most groups have a given advantage that can be used over others. Because different interest groups have access to different resources, these advantages tend to be in different areas. Thus no single group has a complete power over a significant number of issues.

As with any theory, criticism of pluralism came from many different sides. Economist Mancur Olson, in 1965, suggested that pluralism was not as strong as some believed, and posited that any individual can – and indeed would – only make a difference in the rarest of cases: if the arguments are balanced so finely that the success of either party rests on the efforts of one individual. He qualified this by arguing that if the campaigning group was very large, they would win simply on the grounds of their size. Similarly, if the group was very small they would not have the political momentum to win, regardless of other factors. In either case, one additional member of the group would not make a difference to the outcome. Crucially, Olson believed that the rational individual knew this, and so would ‘free-ride’ on the efforts of others as part of the group unless it was apparent that they needed to actively contribute (at a personal level) for the group to succeed. Olson’s ideas put forward the notion that individuals can be incentivised into a cause, in turn giving way to the idea of ‘public choice theory’, and of Market Liberalism. (D+D p53)

At first it might appear that there are some similarities between the theories of market liberalism and pluralism. For example, market liberalism disagrees with the notion of government owned facilities, instead arguing for privatisation. As noted by the economist Friedman von Hayek, if the state own services such as healthcare, then citizens become “powerless supplicants, dependant upon bureaucrats and politicians for key decisions affecting their lives.” (D+D p103) The reasoning behind the market liberalist approach is that deregulation would allow individuals to establish consumer control over key services. Thus, one might try to argue, market liberalism and pluralism both condone power in multiple hands, rather than in one authority figure.

However the key difference between the two is that market liberals focus on individuals, not on groups. The theories of microeconomics that are applied to individuals, within the market liberalism framework, cannot apply to groups (however small). So while market liberalists can recognise (for example) interest groups, they posit that such groups “can only be understood in terms of the individuals who compose them…” not as a collective entity. Thus speaking of a collective (“the working class”, “business”, and so forth), in market liberalism terms, is a way of addressing a group of individuals who merely share a given characteristic (a certain wage bracket, a commercial enterprise, etc.). They do not act as a unit, and so this ‘group’ would not be recognised as such by a pluralist. (D+D p106)

Indeed, market liberalism seems to remain the dominant theory throughout the western world. The economic crisis of 2008 lead to mass state intervention in markets across the globe – certainly not something borne of free market ideals. But, never the less, the capitalist state seems to have survived.

However neither market liberalism nor pluralism can readily be used as a theory to explain the actions of governments of the eastern European bloc during the mid-20th century. For this, Marxism plays a much more tangible role. At its centre, Marxists believe in the ultimate end of class categorisation of society. The central tenants focus on the struggle between those of the dominant class, and those who work for them. In its modern, capitalist guise, the bourgeoisie are those who own the factors of production in a given economy and thus are the dominant class. They are served by the proletariat, the workers who provide their labour (D+D p88).

In particular, Marxists argue that those in the upper class have complete control over state affairs. While this conforms with pluralist notions, insomuch as neither believes this should be the case, Marxists disagree that sections of society other than the bourgeoisie ultimately have any influence. In this respect, the arguments against Pluralism in favour of Marxism are similar to those arguments for Elitism.

Yet ultimately communism, and by extension Marxism, has not yet been successful in any part of the world – at least not in its purest form. The ‘controlled economy’ of The Soviet Union, which perhaps showed promise in its infancy, eventually fell into stagnation, which in turn led to the collapse of the state (H+H p152). In any case, while the rise of the so-called ‘communist’ states is undeniable (putting aside their subsequent fall), they were not fully-fledged communists as Marx would describe them. Rather, they would probably be more accurately described as socialist states; the ‘middle ground’ that Marx recognised as a necessary stage between capitalism and communism (lecture notes 2010).

Moreover, Marxism is not readily put forward as the key theory of governance in the western world. While its explanation of the bourgeoisie and proletariat classes have some resonance even today, traditional Marxism (in particular) struggles to account for the changes in class structure in recent times (i.e. the advent of the ‘middle class’). Indeed, the very fact that groups began to emerge that transcended the so called ‘class-divide’, and instead focused on such things as ethnicity and geography, not only weakens Marxism as a theory, but actually strengthens the ideas of Pluralism. (D+D p89)

As a critique of Pluralism then, Marxism goes some way to addressing some of its associated problems. But while the theory may be sound, the practice has failed to show success. In the western world, it could be argued that Elite theory has shown itself to be more inline with how the system works.

The core principle of elite theory is that society is composed of two groups: an elite ruling class, and a mass of other citizens who are presided over by them. This is true in all cases, it is argued, because the general populous “could not possibly acquire the competence to be effective participants in politics”, and must instead be led by an individual or small group who have the necessary capabilities. The difference between this train of thought and that of Pluralism is striking. Whereas Pluralists see society as devised of many different factions, each with their own political goals, followers of elite theory only see two groups: the elite and the mass. Furthermore, this is not a duopoly of power where each side contributes to the running of the state. In fact, elitists (particularly early elitists such as Mosca) thought the mass highly disinterested in politics. (D+D p58)

Political scientist and economist Joseph Schumpeter didn’t agree entirely that the mass were politically disinterested. However he did think that they were very impressionable, stating in his book ‘Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy’ that groups of like-minded individuals are “terribly easy to work up… into a state of frenzy” and succumb to a kind of ‘mob-mentality’, thereby making it less likely that the cause a given individual is championing is truly his own. (Schumpeter, p257, quoted in Bentley lecture)

Not only does Schumpeter’s description of people make democracy seem less than appealing (if in fact actually plausible), it contrasts directly with the very cornerstone of Pluralism – namely that groups of individuals are not only capable of knowing what it is they want from the state, but they are willing to assert themselves and attempt to secure it.

The fact that interest groups exist, both in the public and private sphere, suggests that Pluralism withstands scrutiny (at least at first glance). Surely if the Elitists were right, such groups would have no influence? However, a look at the UK shows us that perhaps competitive Elitism might be a better model for describing government. Schumpeter stated that “…the role of the people is to produce a government…” (Schumpeter p269). After the election of the government, the citizen’s role ends, and democracy has served its purpose (lecture notes Bentley). Crucially, the citizens should not try to influence the decisions of the government. Indeed when one looks at the UK government, this is more or less what we see. With the exception of referendums (in themselves a rare occurrence) the public are called on only once every 5 years to make an overtly political decision: to decide the new government. After that choice is made, the public go back to their business and are not called upon again for another 5 years. Interest groups, particularly those championed by ‘ordinary’ members of the public (as opposed to MPs, head of businesses, and the like), do not seem to have a great deal of influence in government policy when compared with other sectors of society, and they certainly don’t have an equal input (comparatively or otherwise).

Elitism, then, would seem to have better arguments for discussing the way government is run, even in the western world. Furthermore, while Pluralism has never been able to account for the actions of states such as the Soviet Union, Elitism was much better at predicting the communist path the leaders took.

But can we really say Elitism is the best model for describing governance, particularly in the western world? While it is true that competitive elitism accurately describes the way the UK government is elected, and that the Pluralists ideas of everyone having a comparative advantage in given areas do not seem to be a reality, interest groups never the less do have an impact on policy. Schumpeter’s model, in particular, pays little attention to “…groups such as community associations… trade unions…” and so forth, all of which act as links between different institutions. (Held p158) 

So it would seem that elitism, along with all the other theories of the state, has its pitfalls. While different aspects of Pluralism have been criticised by various other theories, each theory in turn has been criticised itself. Subsequently, each theory was revised, and, in the case of Pluralism, Neo-Pluralism emerged.

Some time in the 1980s, Robert Dahl realised that pluralism in its traditional form suffered greatly at the hands of various other theories of governance. In particular, it seemed ever more apparent that, to stay in power, governments needed to pander to the wants and needs of the private sector businesses (Held p170). The problem with pluralism, thought Dahl, was that it misinterpreted the way that power was distributed. Pluralists, as discussed earlier, believed in an equality of influence. Even though different groups had different resources, because the areas in which they had those resources differed, they had relative advantages.

The issue with this theory was that it didn’t bear out in practice. Marxists, in particular, recognised the inequalities that were apparent within the economy. The capitalist nature of the liberal democracy in the western world meant that businesses have a ‘latent power’ within society. In short, businesses control the economy, and thus the well-being of the capitalist state. If government passes legislature that ill-serves the private sector the result will be an economic downturn, which ultimately will force the public to question the competence of the government. As Elitists point out, this is the only question the general public is explicitly asked regarding politics. Therefore it is important that the government stays on the side of both the private sector and the general public. (D+D p133)

To address this over sight on the part of the Pluralist theory, Dahl developed a revised theory – namely Neo-Pluralism. Neo-pluralists still believed that political power is held by more than one part of society. But it also acknowledges that the business sector has the unfair advantage over all other sectors. This brings Neo-pluralism somewhat inline with both Marxism and Elitism (both, obviously, for different reasons), while satisfying the ideas of commerce that Market Liberals hold. Neo-pluralism, thus, helps to reconcile the differences seen between the theories and the real world.

## Bibliography

Theories of the Democratic State - Dryzek and Dunleavy

Models of democracy – David Held

Lecture notes – Graham Smith

Lecture notes – Russell Bentley

Comparative Government and Politics – Hague and Harrop

STALLEY, R. F. ed. (1995) Aristotle: Politics, Oxford: University Press.

Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy - Joseph Alois Schumpeter